# Documentation

## Net

A `Net` is a collection of neural network `Layers` and configuration parameters which define in what sequence various inputs are applied to layers within the network.

*Note*: the net class will soon be updated to make it more clear when a Leabra Network is being defined versus some other type of neural net. A dict called `runConfig_std` provides the definition of the Leabra execution flow, but this turned out to be more convoluted than expected. The end goal is very legible scripts defining networks, and more detailed parameters would be provided as json files. Leabra uses a css-style of defining these types of parameters, and a similar feature will be implemented in the future.

## Layer

A `Layer` is an abstraction representing a set of neurons. Layer objects are responsible for applying dynamic nonlinearities within the neural network. Should also define any functions necessary for updating the internal states of the Layer that are used for learning. The base class only defines type-checking features and the basic creation of connections to `Path` classes. Other functions used for updating internal states should be managed at the network level and correspond to the Net type (*only Leabra for now*).

#### Methods
 - `__init__(shape, signalIn=Data, signalOut=Data, signalParams={}, **kwargs)`:
   - Args:
     - `shape`: shape of the representation of data
     - `signalIn`: type of signal accepted by the layer, used for type-checking against `Path` objects when a connection is added.
     - `signalOut`: type of signal generated, used to initialize the output signal with the provided shape.
     - `signalParams`: a dict that gets unpacked and passed to the constructor of the datatype provided by `signalOut`.
 - `ConnectPath(path)`: Calls `VerifyConnection(path)` and handles attachment of the path to the input of the layer.
 - `VerifyPath(path)`: Verifies that the type of output signal used by the path matches the expected.
 - `Get()`: Returns the output signal generated by a call to `dataOut.Get()`

#### Attributes
 - `dataOut`: the output of the layer stored as a `Data` object that handles the addition of noise. The noise generator and other parameters are initialized during Layer creation according to the `signalParams` dict.
 - `inputType`: stores the type of input data expected, used for type checking in the `VerifyConnection()` method.
    
#### Subclasses
 - `LeabraLayer`: Base class for a layer that implements the behavior of Layers using
        the Leabra algorithm for learning. Defines input matrices and uses
        the Leabra simplified conductance neuron model with the NoisyXX1
        activation function. Each layer retains a seperate state for predict
        and observe phases, along with a list of input meshes applied to
        incoming data.

### NeuronDevice

A `NeuronDevice` is a subclass of `Layer` which implements additional features for defining device architecture and performing energy accounting. Also allows for translation from normalized units used by Leabra to physically meaningful units.

*Note*: This subclass has not yet been implemented

### Processes

Each layer transforms its inputs based on a number of processes. Processes are organized into two temporal domains, `Cyclic` and `Phasic` which correspond to once each time step or once each phase.

*Note*: Minimal documentation is provided in the README.md though some details in implementation may change.

## Path

A `Path` is an abstraction representing a set of synaptic connections between two layers and parameters which define how the synaptic variables are updated during training.

#### Methods:
 - `__init__(sendLayer, recvLayer, **kwargs)`:  initializes the Path object
   - Args:
     - `sendlayer`: pre-synaptic layer.
     - `recvLayer`: post-synaptic layer.
     - `**kwargs`:  dict to hold additional parmeters including the traditional leabra parameters for initializing and updating synaptic connections.
 - `Update()`:  Uses a subclass-defined method called `CalculateUpdate()` to generate a delta vector with the same shape as the synaptic matrix, and then calls an `ApplyUpdate(delta)` that should be overwritten in all subclasses to calculate updates from parameters and update any other internal parameters and material states.
 - `Apply()`:  Calculates and returns input for the next layer using data from the previous layer. Calls a subclass-defined method called `ApplyTo(signal)` which defines how the data is handled.

#### Subclasses:
 - `LeabraPath`: implements the Leabra algorithms for training synapses in a two-phase network. Minus phase represents expectations, and Plus phase represents the ground truth such that the difference in local activities reflects signal updates.
 - `TimingPath`: (*in progress*) implements learning in the form of spike-timing-dependent plasticity (STDP)

 ### SynapticDevice(Path)

 A `SynapticDevice` is a subsubclass of `Path` which adds functionality for energy accounting that integrates the power consumption over the course of simulation. The energy is reported as total energy, static energy (meaning the energy of maintaining the weights), and training energy (energy consumed while updating parameters). The device should be a subsubclass of a `Path` subclass which handles learning at the network level, while the `SynapticDevice` implements the hardware-aware details of training and imperfections.

 #### Methods
 - `__init__(sendLayer, recvLayer, DataSignalType=Data, **kwargs)`:  initializes the Path object
   - Args:
     - `sendlayer`: pre-synaptic layer.
     - `recvLayer`: post-synaptic layer.
     - `inDataType`: Specifies the type of data signal that can be received by the synaptic device.
     - `outDataType`: Specifies the type of data signal that is output by the synaptic device.
     - `**kwargs`:  dict to hold parmeters for the parent `Path` constructor, but also to hold device parameters for initializing the structure of the current `SynapticDevice`
 - `CalcUpdate(delta: np.ndarray)`:  Calculates the necessary changes in device parameters to implement the change from the delta vector. Should also call necessary functions for calculating the energetic cost of training.
 - `ApplyTo(data: Data)`:  Calculates and returns the synaptic currents generated from applying the matrix to the input. Should also call any functions necessary for calculating hysteresis of memristive effects of underlying parameters.

 #### Subclasses
  - `MZImesh`:  Meshes of photonic interferometers
    - `ClementsMZI`
    - `DiagMZI`
    - `SVDMZI`
  - `Crossbar`:  Simple crossbar arrays
    - `PCMcrossbar`
    - `ReRam`
    - `Ionic`

 ## Signal

 A `Signal` is an abstraction for the data that moves through the neural network and includes features for type checking and conversion between normalized and physically meaningful units. Divided into `Data` signals that communicate the activity of the neural network between layers and synaptic pathways, and `Control` signals which are used to configure parameters of the devices in the network.

 #### Methods
 - `__init__(values=None, shape=None, limits=(0,np.inf), scale=None, dimNames=None, bitPrecision=None, noisefunc = lambda x:x, **kwargs)`
    - Args:
      - `values`: (optional) set of initial values for the signal.
      - `shape`: (optional) shape to initialize signal (required if values are not given).
      - `limits`: (optional) limits to describe the maximum and minimium valeus that the signal can take.
      - `scale`: (optional) scale factor to be used converting between normalized and phyiscally meaningful values. Scale must be provided if limits do not give a finite range.
      - `dimNames`: (optional) metadata to describe what each dimension in the shape represents. e.g. a photonic signal may be composed of multiple waveguides, wavelengths, modes, etc.
      - `bitPrecision`: by default bitPrecision is unrestricted (i.e. infinite), but can be set to discretize the values that can be taken within the limited range of the signal. Cannot be set if finite limits are not provided.
      - `noisefunc`: (optional) function for generating noise. Gets applied on top of the signal each time the `Get()` method is called. Subclasses and calling classes may provide this function.
      - `**kwargs`: catchall for additional parameters that subclasses might use that are ignored in the base class.
 - `Set(data: np.ndarray, record=False)`: updates all representations of the Signal using the physically meaningful representation. Optionally adds the signal to the `records` attribute which tracks the history of signals for calculating various metrics at the end of the simulation.
 - `SetNorm(data: np.ndarray, record=False)`: updates all representations of the Signal using a normalized representation. Optionally adds the signal to the `records` attribute which tracks the history of signals for calculating various metrics at the end of the simulation.
 - `Get()`: returns the physically meaningful representation of the Signal.
 - `GetNorm()`: returns the normalized representation of the Signal.

 #### Attributes
  - `records = []`: a list of previous values the signal has taken, useful for calculating 

 #### Subclasses
  - `Control`: Signals meant for the control plane of the neural network. Used to set tunable device parameters or maintain state.
  - `Data`: Signals meant to represent neural activity in the network and yield interpretable results.
  - `Voltage[Data|Control]`: includes both Data and Control signal subclasses for type-checking functionality
  - `Current[Data|Control]`: includes both Data and Control signal subclasses for type-checking functionality
  - `Photonic[Data|Control]`: primarily represented as complex E-field coefficients for each wavelength with convenience functions for calculating power and phase. Includes both Data and Control signal subclasses for type-checking functionality
 
 ## ParamSet
 
 A `ParamSet` is an abstraction for calculating transfer matrices of devices. Used to provide type-checking features.

#### Methods
 - `__init__(values=None, shape=None, dimNames=None, generator=None, **kwargs)`
    - Args:
      - `values`: optional values to initialize the set of parameters.
      - `shape`: if values are not provided, the shape and generator should be set to initialize a vector of the appropriate shape.
      - `generator`: if values are not provided, the generator function is called which should take in a tuple representing the shape, and returns an `np.ndarray` of the appropriate shape.
      - `**kwargs`: catchall for additional parameters that subclasses might use that are ignored in the base class.
 - `Set(data: np.ndarray)`:
 - `Get()`: returns the parameters. Other get functions may return the same parameters in a different representation (e.g. complex phase representation vs radians).


 #### Attributes
  - `records = []`: a list of previous values the parameter has taken, useful for calculating 

 #### Subclasses
  - `PhaseShift`: phase shift that can be represented either as a complex coefficient of a signal or a real number format specifying the phase shift in radians.
  - `Gain`: signal gain represented as a normalized values (e.g. 1.2 for 20% gain). Also allows for conversion to dB.
  - `Attenuation`: signal attenuation represented as a normalized values (e.g. 0.8 for 20% attenuation). Also allows for conversion to dB. for resistance, optical absorber, etc.
  - `Const`: subclasses that should throw an error if modification is attempted, meant to represent random fabrication tolerances that modify some parameter just once and then should not.
    - `CouplingCoeff`: coupling factor between two ports represented as normalized values and with a second dimension to specify the compliment. The shape is stored as (2, numCouplers). e.g. two couplers could be represented as [[0.2,0.4],[0.8,0.6]].
  

 ## MaterialDef

 A `MaterialDef` is an abstraction for defining material parameters and interactions that are used to calculate the relationship between a `ParamSet` and `Control` signals. The `MaterialDef` should also provide functions for calculating the power consumption required to maintain the state and update the parameters.

 #### Methods
 - `__init__(shape=None, dimNames=None, **kwargs)`
    - Args:
      - `**kwargs`: catchall for additional parameters that subclasses might use that are ignored in the base class.
 - `GetParams()`: returns the `ParamSet` described by the materials.
 - `CalcEnergy(deltaTime: float)`: returns a report of the energy consumption over the simulation using the data stored in the `records` attribute. Returns TotalEnergy, StaticEnergy (consumed by maintaining the state during inference), and TrainingEnergy (consumed during the updating of parameters).
 - `ApplyControl(signal: Control)`: Updates the underlying `ParamSet` according to any changes in the control signal. This function is primarily used during training.
 - `ApplyData(signal: Data)`: Updates the underlying `ParamSet` according to any changes caused by data passing through the material. This is primarily used for simulating the effects of hysteresis.

 #### Attributes
  - `records = {}`: a dictionary of lists recording various states of important variables used over the course of the simulation.
  - `ParamType`: Type of parameter the `MaterialDef` should return, used when type-checking connections between components.

 #### Subclasses
  - `PhaseShifter`: various types of optical phase shifters
    - `ThermalPS`
    - `MOSCAP`
    - `PCM`
  - `Resistive`: elements with tunable resistance controlled by a gate (like a transistor). Also includes attenuative elements like those used in optical crossbars.
  - `Memristor`: (not yet implemented) resistive elements with hysteresis in the data pathway
  